License text copyright (c) 2020 MariaDB Corporation Ab, All Rights Reserved.
"Business Source License" is a trademark of MariaDB Corporation Ab.

Parameters

Licensor:             Open Governance, Inc.
Licensed Work:        all versions of opensecurity.
Additional Use Grant: You may make production use of the Licensed Work, provided
                      your use does not include offering the Licensed Work to third
                      parties on a hosted or embedded basis in order to compete with
                      Open Governance's paid version(s) of the Licensed Work. For purposes
                      of this license:

                      A "competitive offering" is a Product that is offered to third
                      parties on a paid basis, including through paid support
                      arrangements, that significantly overlaps with the capabilities
                      of Open Governance's paid version(s) of the Licensed Work, including paid support.

                      Products distributed without charge are considered non-competitive.

                      "Product" means software that is offered to end users to manage
                      in their own environments or offered as a service on a hosted
                      basis.

                      "Embedded" means including the source code or executable code
                      from the Licensed Work in a competitive offering. "Embedded"
                      also means packaging the competitive offering in such a way
                      that the Licensed Work must be accessed or downloaded for the
                      competitive offering to operate.

                      Hosting or using the Licensed Work(s) for internal purposes
                      within an organization is not considered a competitive offering.
                      Open Governance considers your organization to include all
                      of your affiliates under common control.

                      For binding interpretive guidance on using Open Governance products
                      under the Business Source License, please visit our FAQ.
                      (https://www.opensecurity.io/license-faq)

Change Date:          Four years after the Licensed Work’s publication, starting from November 1, 2024
                      (meaning the earliest date of conversion would be November 1, 2028).
Change License:       MPL 2.0

For information about alternative licensing arrangements for the Licensed Work,
please contact licensing@opensecurity.io.
